out=ugly-oafs-invisiclues.htm
!Ugly Oafs HTML Clues
->c:/games/inform/uglyoafs Materials/Release
>ABOVE GROUND
?I don't have any points yet! Help!
There are a lot of clues, like scenery that shifts or can't be taken.
The cold frog and cubed melon are clues, as is even Psst! Loop!
If you visit every square, you may get additional clues as well.
THINK collates all hints.
At the very least, you should be able to see that words of the same length are together.
?Why does the onyx make me balk?
Telling would spoil a bit.
Here's another bit of a spoiler: 'Oho, bub!'
There's a third one, too, once you go all around: "Nowhere, abjurer!"
?Should I map the game out?
It won't hurt. It's a pretty straightforward map, but hitting every square unlocks a new clue.
"Nowhere, Abjurer" is a big one.
?The river is rushing now! What does this mean?
It means you can drop an individual item in it.
Wherever the item winds up, you can do something with that item in that area.
If you haven't gotten a point yet, it may help you with what to do.
If you want to save and restore, here, that'll be okay.
If an item seems to have disappeared, it means it went below ground.
You can worry about below ground later, but there may be one item most worth putting in the river.
Apparently, one can change to an oaf. Which?
The one that sounds like an oaf--the cot.
DROP COT IN RIVER. Find where it goes. OAF. If you read the marker, you may get a clue.
?Okay, just explain what's going on.
It's possible to figure out the mechanic on the starting square, if you know about encodings and ciphers. You may recognize some words. But you shouldn't feel bad if you don't.
The numbers on the markers mean something.
In fact, the writing on marker 26-X is the writing on marker X.
26 is the number of letters in the alphabet.
You may also note that there are posts DAN & HER and ROB & HER, with 4 and 10 respectively. Maybe this can help.
D is 4 characters from H, A is 4 from E, and N is 4 from R.
R is 10 from H, O is 10 from E, and B is -16 from R--or, well, 26.
You can change rotational cyphers by X in a place marked with the number X, backwards or forwards.
Any one clue isn't enough to spring this. You need multiple. If you know about ROT13, you may be able to jump all over the entry square.
You may also get clues from BABE & POPS. P maps to B, and O, the letter before it, maps to A.
There's a lot of evidence, and seeing the pattern can be tough.
?Help! I restarted the game! Where's everything?
Everything moveable is sorted randomly at the game's start.
?23 points! That's a lot! Do I have to get them all?
Actually, you only need 3. See next question for which.
?Which items are ultimately productive?
Three items have a picture of the onyx breaking up on them.
You'll want to link them together to get underground.
The tuffet becomes steeds. (2NW/2SE)
The ingot becomes a chain. (WNW/ESE)
The hats become a sled. (2E/2W)
?Are there any things that give hints?
Yes. If you rescue a few animals, your compassion is rewarded.
The hint stye pops up at the nearest odd zoo if you rescue a few animals.
It lists what switches to what, where you currently are.
?How do I solve things without the hint device?
Well, things with three letters are the easiest to start with. With which to start.
You don't have to consider all 26 possibilities--it may help just to try the middle letter and if it is a vowel. Or you may be able to see what happens if a letter moves to the nearest vowel.
Then switch the first letter to what it needs to be, then see if any words come to mind, and if so, if the end letter fits the shift.
This is a bit trickier for four letters, but it's doable, once you have practice. I hope.
You can also try smaller shifts first, e.g. one letter over, to see if they work.
Another thing I visualized is writing in a 5x5 box, as opposed to a 26x1 strip, and you can map things that way, e.g. everything 1 unit down and 2 right.
There are several ways to visualize this other than brute force.
Some of the items sort-of look like what they should be, but not many. Yes, this is a post-comp thing to fix.
?I have the three items changed. What do I do now?
Chain, steeds, sled.
ATTACH SLED TO STEEDS
SE.SE. Or NW.NW, depending where you are.
Now you can go down the hole. You don't need to do any more.
>>Individual items
>BELOW GROUND
?What's the deal here?
If you look around, you'll see more clues. The markers are a help. The dual numbers mean something.
The words are a bit different, but you may be able to guess.
Wrath Pulse itself is a clue. And Talk Slab.
Everything can be reversed underground, and also...
...the way you can change things is from shifting letter numbers to reversing them. So, for instance, the WRATH PULSE has A+L=1+12=13, H+E=8+5=13, W+P=23+16=39, which, minus 26, is 13.
?Help! A thug/punk is chasing me!
The game did clue you about dark corners! Though you may've had to go there to find an item. Still, they're not too hard to get rid of.
You can get one to fight the other.
Each exists in a random corner of the game.
They are useful for a puzzle to get the "good" ending, but then, so is something else.
?Is there a less/more way to dispose of the thug and punk?
Yes. The thug can become a serf by the wrath pulse.
The punk can become a tyro aboveground.
>>THE QUICK WAY THROUGH
?Help! What's the mechanic, here? I've been all around.
Bob and Anna are clues. They look like they belong by the onyx, because reasons. But--they aren't there!
If we ignore evidence from the signposts, we can note Bob=Bob and Anna=Anna. But there's more.
The signposts have some things like ROW TWO. Perhaps letters map to each other? And if so, how?
You may notice 2 places with a lot of things.
The center has a WRATH PULSE, TALK SLAB, IRE (DUH) and GLEN FAHY.
L <-> A, K -> B, I -> D, H -> E, G -> F, E -> H, A -> L. Do you see the pattern?
The letter-digits sum to 13, or 39.
Another good place to look is WNW of the center, where there's a BANE HIVE.
The grid leaves a WIRY MARK if you go there.
If you get rid of the bee, there's a BOXY HULK.
Do the arithmetic as before.
?Is there a hint item?
Yes, the Rev Box. For reversing. It'll clunk out after your first success.
?What's the quick way through?
The talk slab lets you write. So find something to write with.
One item in particular seems to leave an impression.
?What's the one item you need?
The grid by the BANE HIVE leaves a wiry mark. This is a clue. Perhaps it could leave an impression elsewhere.
The GRID below can become...
...PENS.
Looking at them, you only need one of them to write with.
DROP PEN.
?I've got something to write with. What should I write?
Let's see what your pen can do when the marker value is 13.
39 - 17 (P) = 22 = W.
13 - 5 (E) = 8 = H.
39 - 14 (N) = 25 = Y.
WHY.
Whiny questions like that annoy the pulse.
Also, if you typed score, WHY is also listed as an annoying question.
>>I EXPLORED SOME MORE. I WANT THE GOOD ENDING!
?Should I kick over the hive?
You don't have to, but it helps with the extra-good ending. It produces a bee.
?How do I get rid of the bee?
There are lots of ways to!
Especially since its BZZ noise is a clue, too.
You can tackle the bee or the BZZ.
Also, you can get the bee in a fight. With the thug or punk in the corner.
But for maximum points, dispel the bee itself.
Aboveground, the BEE can become a LOO...
...or just ILL. This is a hidden solution, since adjectives aren't clued as something you can do.
You can also stay belowground and work on the BZZ.
It can become an EGG or a MOO.
Or, above, you can say GEE. Again, like ILL, this is only in there for completion.
?There's something new behind the hive! How do I repel the hulk?
Bringing an enemy by can take him out.
?The thug and punk are gone! What can I do to start a fight?
If you haven't made the tiger from the pecan, you are out of luck.
If you have, you should probably make the tiger fight the hulk.
?Is there anything useful in the prune trove?
The hulk did yell MINE! a lot.
But no, the prune trove is not useful.
However, the MINE! is interesting.
It means two things, both "belonging to me" and a mine.
You don't see any mine here, but how would you make it appear on this square?
M+W = 35. I+A = 9. N+V = 35. E+E = 10.
WAVE
?Is there a hinty thing here? How could I tell?
There sure is!
One marker has lots of stuff scribbled on it. There's something by it, too.
If you examined the goal (WSW) you may note that it is missing a net. Well, not quite a net.
Hey Lou and Real Bosh are the clues here. There's more if you look closely.
One way to look at this is to note GOAL and the writing have three letters in common. So GOAL is --SH.
If you note letters switches can be reversed, elsewhere (e.g. ROW TWO) then GOAL is -ESH. That gets you down to 26 guesses.
The hidden hints do even better. WOOD WEEP and SLOG AHEM give you the first and second words, definitively.
O goes to E, and G goes to M. MESH.
More generally, you can note the following.
A -> S D -> P E -> O G -> M H -> L L -> H O -> E R -> B S -> A W -> W Y -> U
The adjacent and reflexive letters should clue what is going on here, that this is a reverse cypher.
?Help! I can't get in the mine!
You need some sort of talisman.
This requires the help of a friend.
Rescue the oaf diver.
?What's in the snare?
It's in a fixed location.
Because that location is fixed, you know what you can change it to.
It hides a DIVER.
?How do I get the diver to follow me? And where?
TALK TO DIVER.
The diver could dive in the river.
It could also dive in one place you need to make.
It's below ground. It's fixed.
The rift can become a FORD.
The oaf should dive in automatically.
Once it dives both places, you get a trophy.
That trophy will let you in the mine.
?Who are the cool guys?
Well, there are cool guys elsewhere in the game.
Well, with a meta-command.
Davy Fink and Andy Boyd.
The middle cool guy is Perry Creel.
Davy Fink and Andy Boyd follow the cipher below-ground.
In particular, they shift 10 and 3.
The combo is 3-13-10 or 10-13-3.
Once you have the fry gun, just walk to the wrath pulse.
>GENERAL
?Why the pseudonym?
It's another clue for the game mechanic. ROT-13.
There are a few oblique hints as to my real name.
Like the odd "include" modules in the attached source that are not on the Inform website..
You can also read the safe for a relatively easy clue (I hope.)
Also the reference to Yorpwald, from my two Stale Tales Slate games, Shuffling Around and A Roiling Original (now with fewer senseless puzzles!)
?Did you really forget to credit your testers in the IFComp release?
Yes, yes I did. I feel very bad about that.
But they were in the source code, so I didn't totally leave them out! I guess.
This oversight also hosed over the super-good-ending puzzle.
And yes, yes, the competition cover art has PerCy Creel. I didn't convert a BMP to PNG.
Or give my testers enough time.
See, there's a way more general lesson in this game beyond how to fiddle with words or letters!